# **Data Engineer Nanodegree Project 4:**
# **Datalake with Apache Spark**

## **Overview**
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

# **Datasets**

We are working with 2 Datasets that are located on AWS S3.

## **Song Dataset**
Songs dataset is a subset of [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/).
Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

This is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

## **Log Dataset**
Logs dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by [Event Simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim).

This is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like :
```
{"artist": null, "auth": "Logged In", "firstName": "Walter", "gender": "M", "itemInSession": 0, "lastName": "Frye", "length": null, "level": "free", "location": "San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA", "method": "GET","page": "Home", "registration": 1540919166796.0, "sessionId": 38, "song": null, "status": 200, "ts": 1541105830796, "userAgent": "\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"", "userId": "39"}
```

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

#### Fact Table 
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`

```
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
```

#### Dimension Tables
**users**  - users in the app
```
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
```
**songs**  - songs in music database
```
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
```
**artists**  - artists in music database
```
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
```
**time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
```
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
```



## Project Files

```etltest.ipynb``` -> can be used for testing the etl process

```etl.py``` -> reads and processes files from S3 and writes parquet files to the output path provided in ```dl.cfg```

```dl.cfg``` -> Config file for AWS Credentials and input/output paths. It provides a ```[TEST]``` Section and a ```[DATA]``` to provide a smaller dataset for testing

## How to run

First setup the ```dl.cfg```, then you can test the etl process with the ```etltest.ipynb``` notebook. 
After that you can run ```etl.py``` to read and process the files from S3 and write the tables to parquet files to the desired ouput path
