# **Data Engineer Nanodegree Project 3:**
# **Datawarehouse with AWS Redshift**

## **Overview**
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results

# **Datasets**

We are working with 2 Datasets that are located on AWS S3.

## **Song Dataset**
Songs dataset is a subset of [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/).
Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

This is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

## **Log Dataset**
Logs dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by [Event Simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim).

This is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like :
```
{"artist": null, "auth": "Logged In", "firstName": "Walter", "gender": "M", "itemInSession": 0, "lastName": "Frye", "length": null, "level": "free", "location": "San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA", "method": "GET","page": "Home", "registration": 1540919166796.0, "sessionId": 38, "song": null, "status": 200, "ts": 1541105830796, "userAgent": "\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"", "userId": "39"}
```

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

#### Fact Table 
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`

```
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
```

#### Dimension Tables
**users**  - users in the app
```
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
```
**songs**  - songs in music database
```
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
```
**artists**  - artists in music database
```
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
```
**time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
```
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
```

## Project Files

```sql_queries.py``` -> contains all sql queries for dropping and creating fact and dimension tables, staging tables and insertion queries

```create_tables.py``` -> drops and creates tables. Run this file to reset your tables before each time you run the ETL scripts

```redshift_test.ipynb``` -> can be used for creating IAM Role, Redshift Cluster and testing DB connection and ETL results

```etl.py``` -> reads and processes files from S3 copies it into staging tables and loads the data to your Redshift tables

```dwh.cfg``` -> Config file for the Connection Setup to AWS Redshift and AWS S3
## How to run

First setup the ```dwh.cfg```, then run the file ```create_tables.py``` to create the tables. After that you can run ```etl.py``` to read and process the files from S3 copy it to the staging tables and inserting it to the Redshift fact and dimension tables.
By running the ```redshift_test.ipynb``` you are able to view and query the process